The main tool for testing RESTful APIs in Spring is the MockMvc tool.
MockMvc was introduced back in Spring 3.
2,
and is an easy-to-use tool for standing up your application's RESTful endpoints,
sending in requests, and then expecting a response.
In this demo,
we will utilize a MockMvc tool to exercise a RESTful controller and
validate behaviors within the Spring MVC library.
Looking at the controller for CustomerService,
there are already two endpoints written,
an endpoint for retrieving all customers,
and a second endpoint for looking up customers by first name and last name.
At the top of the test class TestCustomerController,
I have added the RunWith annotation and the WebMvcTest annotation.
WebMvcTest was added in Spring Boot 1.
4 and makes the process of testing the web layer easier.
WebMvcTest stands up just the web layer of your boot application,
and also configures and puts in the application context a mockMvc object,
along with just simply autowiring it into our test class.
In the WebMvcTest annotation declaration,
we will tell it we will be testing the CustomerController class,
and also turning off security.
We will be testing security in a separate test class.
I have went ahead and created a few test cases.
The first two test cases will be simulating successful calls to the endpoints.
In testSuccessfulFindAllCustomers,
using MockMvc we can configure it to make a get
request to the customer's endpoint.
The point of component integration testing,
which I'll be reinforcing throughout this module,
is to validate the behaviors of the libraries our code depends upon.
And the controller we are telling Spring MVC to return an HTTP status
of 200 Ok on the successful execution of customers.
By default, Spring MVC sets the response content type as APPLICATION_JSON_UTF8,
and we will just want to do some high-level
verification of the response returned.
These tests are here to let us know if the behavior of Spring MVC changes.
Tests that validate the correct payload is being returned
for a given input should be handled separately as unit
tests for CustomerController.
Running our test, we get a green result.
In testSuccessSearchCustomersByFNameLName,
we will follow a similar pattern with a call to customers/search/byFNameLName,
and similar checks on the response.
This test also returns green.
Another default behavior of Spring MVC is it requires all request parameters.
We will validate this behavior in
testMissingParamSearchCustomersByFNameLName by calling search/byFNameLName
again, but only with the fName parameter.
When a required parameter is missing,
Spring MVC by default returns a 400 bad request error code.
So in the test case, we will tell MockMvc to look for this response code.
And running the test,
that is what we confirm is happening by getting a green return.
Finally within our service class,
we will test to make sure the parameters passed in follow a valid format.
The specific format doesn't matter.
What does matter is that when the service class returns an exception,
our controller properly handles it.
Updating our MockMvc, we will be looking for a text/plain content type,
as well as a message from the thrown exception.
And this test returns green as well.
Great!
MockMvc is a powerful and easy-to-use tool for validating
the behavior of your RESTful endpoints. We will use it a bit more in a couple of the other demos in this module.